Solar and Wind Energy Leading Global Power Transition

Solar and wind energy have grown fast enough to meet all new electricity demand worldwide for the first three quarters of 2025 according to energy think tank Ember. Solar generation jumped 498 terawatt hours representing a 31 percent increase compared to the same period last year already topping all the solar power produced in 2024. Wind added another 137 terawatt hours with 7.6 percent growth. Together they supplied 635 terawatt hours of new clean electricity beating out the 603 terawatt hour rise in global demand.

For the first time on record renewable energies combined generated more power than coal in the first half of 2025. Renewables grew by 363 terawatt hours reaching 5072 terawatt hours while coal generation fell by 31 terawatt hours to 4896 terawatt hours. As a result renewables share of global electricity rose to 34.3 percent while coal's share fell to 33.1 percent marking a historic milestone in the energy transition.

Global renewable power capacity is projected to double over the next five years increasing by 4600 gigawatts roughly the same as adding the total power generating capacity of China the European Union and Japan combined. Solar PV will account for around 80 percent of the global increase in renewable power capacity over the next five years driven by low costs and faster permitting timeframes followed by wind hydro bioenergy and geothermal.

China installed more wind and solar power in one year than the total amount of renewable energy currently operating in the United States. By the end of last year China had installed more than 1400 gigawatts of solar and wind capacity. Another 500 gigawatts of clean energy is currently being built. In China fossil generation fell 52 terawatt hours as clean energy met all new demand confirming a structural change in the country's electricity system.

India saw fossil generation drop 34 terawatt hours thanks to record solar and wind growth and milder weather. India is one of the leading developing countries for new solar and wind capacity. The EU aims to generate nearly 43 percent of its energy from renewables by the end of the decade supported by policies favoring clean energy development.

In the United States solar accounted for 74.4 percent of total new capacity placed into service in the first seven months of 2025. Solar has been the largest source of new generating capacity added each month for 23 consecutive months from September 2023 to July 2025. Wind accounted for 15.2 percent of all new capacity. The combination of solar and wind was 89.6 percent of new capacity.

Low-cost solar is driving the clean energy boom as renewables become cheaper than new fossil fuel power plants in many regions. Geothermal installations are on course to hit historic highs in key markets including the United States Japan Indonesia and emerging economies. Rising grid integration challenges are renewing interest in pumped-storage hydropower whose growth is expected to be almost 80 percent faster over the next five years.

The findings suggest it is possible for the world to wean off polluting sources of power even as demand for electricity skyrockets with continued investment in renewables. Solar sits at the center of this transformation having become the main driver of change in the global power sector with growth more than three times larger than any other source of electricity.